>>Everybody loves a box.
Especially an
exciting-looking box.
Something absolutely fascinating
about what is in the box.
And this is a box--
mm-- full of goodies.
Because it contains some of
the most priceless oriental
incenses.
It's like when the
wise men brought
the baby Jesus gold,
frankincense and myrrh.
These treasures,
including a pair
of scissors for dealing
with these things.
I think they're actually
17th century English
candle-snuffers.
But they handle
incense very well.
And then there's very exotic
incense from Nepal in here,
of which we'll see
something more about later.
You know, it seems sort
of ridiculous to talk
about incense on TV.
In England, you know,
they call TV the telly.
And I'm going to try
and make it the smelly.
Although that's electronically
impossible and probably
will be possible someday.
There's a curious
reason why we haven't
investigated that kind of thing.
Because I wonder if you
realize that the sense of smell
is our repressed sense.
The one that we aren't
really very proud of.
For example, if I ask you, do
you smell-- it seems somehow
a little bit of a rude question.
There's a famous
story, you know,
about that great
British literatus,
Dr. Johnson, who got onto
a stagecoach one day--
and this was in the 18th
century, when people didn't
bathe as much as they do today.
And shortly after a lady
got onto the stagecoach
and sat opposite him and said
to him, "Sir, you smell."
He said, "On the contrary,
madam, you smell!
I stink."
And so you see how, in this
way, even in those times,
the word "smell" had a bad odor.
And it's curious
also there are only
four adjectives in the
English language that
apply specifically to
the sense of smell.
We have acrid, pungent,
fragrant, and putrid.
We have ever so many
adjectives from taste,
which we apply to
smell-- from plants,
when we say something is musky--
or something of that kind.
But we really aren't
very conscious
of the sense of smell.
And yet, although we're
not conscious of it,
it exercises an enormous
influence upon us,
just because we're
not conscious of it.
I believe that instant
likes and dislikes
that we have for other people
that are sometimes completely
irrational are based on an
unconscious apprehension
of whether we do or
don't like their smell.
You know, too, how smells are
so powerful in evoking memories.
Something you
smelled as a child.
Say, the smell of fresh
coffee being cooked early
in the morning, or
bacon frying, or leaves
being burned on an autumn
day-- all these things
evoke very vivid
emotions and feelings
of our childhood in the past.
But you know, when people
talk about very deep things,
they never talk about
the sense of smell.
They talk about touch,
vision, and even taste.
And hearing.
For example, we hear
about the vision of God.
In the Catholic
church it is said
that the highest thing
to which man can attain--
or to which the
angels can attain--
is the beatific vision.
To see God.
And the prophets would
hear the word of the lord.
And in one of the
psalms it says,
"Oh, taste and see how
excellent the lord is."
Taste and see.
But no one ever had the
idea of smelling God,
of having not just the beatific
vision but the beatific smell.
This has never been brought out.
And yet, curiously enough,
throughout the whole history
of religions--
until we got to what
is called the phenomenon of
the Protestant nose-- we've
had incense.
Hindus use incense,
Buddhists use incense,
Mohammedans use incense,
Catholics use incense.
But there came a break at
the time of the Reformation
when incense was
somehow given up.
Oh, Hebrews use incense, too.
Or used to.
And why is this?
Why this repression
of the sense of smell?
I don't fully know the
answer to that question,
except to say that I do
know that it is repressed.
And that it's a shame
we're depriving ourselves
of a whole world of wonder.
Because the nose is just
as sensitive as the ears.
And there can be
music for the nose
in the same way as
music for the ears.
And the same way as there
can be glories for the eyes,
there can be glories
for the nose.
And I don't know why we're
so diffident, so uptight,
about admitting
that we have noses.
Because, of course,
we very well recognize
that animals have the most
incredible senses of smell
and can detect all
sorts of things.
Open up to themselves
a whole new world
of experience by simply
using their noses.
Now, if you don't
use your nose, you
are really in just as
pitiable a condition
as somebody who was
born blind or deaf.
You've lost a whole sense.
And so there is a
whole art of smell.
I don't know one half of it.
And that is the
art of perfumery.
But I do know that a
very skilled manufacturer
of perfumes is a person who
gets a very beautiful lady
and gently and
unostentatiously sniffs
the natural odor of her body.
And then he combines the
natural odor of her body
with a perfume ingredient that
will be its perfect partner.
And therefore make some
entirely individual scene
this is her own authentic smell.
And I don't know
why you shouldn't
have your own authentic
smell, just as you might have
your own authentic voice, your
own authentic face, and indeed,
your own authentic character.
But the mysteries of
perfumery are closed to me.
Not, however, the
mysteries of incense.
And I know quite
a bit about them.
And I thought I would
try-- although television
is kind of an
inconsistent medium
to use-- to show you some
of the mysteries of incense.
Now of course everybody
knows that incense is widely
sold in the United States
of America and in Europe.
And you can buy it
in the dime store.
But the ordinary incense
which is sold to you
is usually black in
color or purple in color.
And although there
are good incenses that
are black and purple, I
advise you on the whole
never to buy a black
or a purple incense,
unless you're buying from
somebody like my friend Kim von
Tempsky, who really
understands incense,
who can advise you what to buy.
But ordinarily black
or purple incenses
smell like cheap perfume.
Bad incense always
has at the back of it
a soapy smell, whereas
a good instance has
a woodsy or resinous
or floral smell.
But it should never
have that feeling
of having a soapy ingredient.
Now absolutely basic incense,
for the Orient, is sandalwood.
And this is a
trunk of sandalwood
on which I've written the
Chinese characters bird, sound,
flower, perfume.
So from the bird, sound.
From the flower, perfume.
That's basic sandalwood.
And sometimes a piece of this
type is made into a statute,
as this charming Hindu goddess.
But, generally
speaking, sandalwood
is the basic incense.
And it comes in various forms.
In chips.
And it comes in powder.
And it comes in sticks.
Now, in order to burn incense,
you need a basis of charcoal.
The thing to do is this.
The best way to burn incense is
to have a bowl with sand in it.
And get charcoal, which you can
buy from ecclesiastical shops,
which is impregnated
with saltpeter so
that it lights itself.
See?
You can use ordinary charcoal
that you use for a barbecue.
But I don't recommend it.
It will work.
And then you get
this charcoal going.
Fanning it.
It's fun, because it sputters
and spits all over the place.
See?
Then, after that, you take a--
say, a chip of incense wood.
And just place it on it.
See?
And slowly it will
heat up and you'll
find the whole room
marvelously impregnated
with this curiously sweet woodsy
smell that isn't icky sweet.
You know, really, there are
two basic kinds of-- well,
three basic kinds of incense.
Temple incense, punk,
for scaring off insects,
and boudoir incense.
Boudoir incense is very,
very erotic in perfume.
Temple incense is very pure.
It has the feeling of
high mountain forests,
of loneliness.
And so thus is the chip
form of sandalwood.
Then there's the powder
You just put a
pinch on, like that.
You see?
Also you can use
powdered sandalwood
for rubbing into your hands.
See, now, I have around my neck
what the Japanese call a juzu.
It's a Buddhist-- a
Zen Buddhist rosary.
And you rub a little
sandalwood powder
into your hands like this.
You see?
And then you play with it.
These are actually used
for counting your breath
during meditation, so that
you don't have to figure.
You just breathe in
and out on each bead.
Once out.
And once in.
And at a certain pace--
there are 108 beads.
At a certain pace, once around
the rosary is half an hour.
Which is sort of a
standard meditation period.
And you don't have
to count, you don't
have to think about
anything except breathing.
But after you've got
through with it--
and you do this very
often-- your whole rosary
is perfumed with sandalwood.
Now another very wonderful
kind of wooden incense--
I'm going to move
this off for a moment.
You know, incense comes in the
most extraordinarily beautiful
packages.
Look at this.
This is from a great
incense shop in Kyoto,
on Teramachi, or
Temple Street, where
they sell every kind
of exciting incense,
marvelous inks, brushes, paper.
All sorts of goodies.
And you see how they
fold the package?
And inside are
these little squares
of a wood which they
call in Japanese jinkoh.
You don't confuse that
with the ginkgo tree.
Jinkoh is aloeswood.
And aloeswood is a tree that
is found in the Orient that
gets a disease which causes the
wood to become extremely hard.
And that very hard wood is an
enormously expensive luxury.
It's, you know-- the
disease of the tree
is like the pearls
in the oyster.
That somehow, out of disease,
comes something beautiful.
And you also can burn
aloeswood on charcoal.
And this has one of the
most marvelous perfumes
in the world.
This really is the high forest.
And old Doctor Suzuki-- he
was the great authority on Zen
Buddhism-- said
the smell of jinkoh
Is the smell of Buddhism.
Because they use this throughout
Buddhist temples in China
and Japan when they're-- shall
we say, putting on the dog,
and using the very
best that they have.
Jinkoh.
It comes in these flat squares.
But it also comes
in granular form.
And this is really rather
easier to use when you can just
sprinkle it on the charcoal.
Now besides this we have so
many other fantastic varieties.
There is a special
incense which the Japanese
use in tea ceremony.
The tea ceremony is
a peculiar thing.
It's a ceremony that is,
as it were, non-religious,
and yet very religious.
All we're doing in tea
ceremony is just drinking tea.
And there are no images, icons,
or religious symbols present.
There is just drinking of
tea in a completely, fully
attentive way.
In which everything
that you do is
done as if it were the
only important thing
in the universe.
You see, tea ceremony
is completely
living in the present.
Being absolutely with
what you're doing.
But in a kind of
relaxed, easy way.
Living in the eternal now,
which is actually the only place
there is to live.
This particular vase, with
its curious little ivory top,
was originally a jar used
for pills or herbal medicine
in Japan.
But the masters of
the tea ceremony
felt that these were so
elegant that they used them
as incense containers
for the ceremony.
This isn't quite the
right way to do things,
because this is using
a-- people get fussy
because I'm using a non-Japanese
thing for a Japanese object.
But this incense is made
of very small, black balls.
And I've never been
able to figure out
what on Earth they put into it.
But it has an absolutely
distinctive smell
associated with
the tea ceremony.
It's lovely stuff.
Then, of course, the
other principal form
of incense which one is
familiar with is stick incense.
And here again things come
in wonderful packages.
Don't you like the way
the Japanese pack things
in these white, wooden boxes?
And then the incense itself
comes in a package like this.
And you extract a stick-- you
have to do it very subtly,
because it breaks
off at the top.
There we go.
And you light it.
Blow it out.
And again, stick it
in a bowl of sand.
That's the easiest
way to handle it.
This particular incense
is based on sandalwood.
When you buy Japanese incense,
usually the green sticks
are based on pine.
And the-- there are
some very fine ones.
The most expensive incense
you can buy is this.
It comes in this sort of a box.
And you open up, inside,
an elaborate package.
And you find inside
this container.
And you find inside that
the sticks themselves.
And this most luxurious of
all types of Japanese incense
is based on musk,
although it's green.
And, as I said, green
is generally pine.
This is particularly lovely.
Then you can find amazing
stick incense from Tibet.
Look at that one.
Isn't that a beauty?
It's a whopper.
Let's set that one up.
This is more-- I
regard this as a punk.
That's not to say-- that's
not a bad thing to say,
like you say someone is a punk.
Punk has the sort of
smell of autumn leaves.
And this is just
a little richer.
But it's very good for
keeping away mosquitoes.
And you can set that up
in a thing like this.
This is a jar full of earth,
so that it will hold the thing.
Then the similar,
marvelous incense
sticks from-- these
are from Nepal.
But it's rather
floppy and dangerous,
and I'm a little afraid that
it might be a fire hazard.
So I'm going to double it over.
Again, this is a--
a coarse incense.
And I have a special
liking for coarse incense.
As distinct from the ones
that are too icky perfumed.
One of the most
extraordinary ones from Nepal
is this, which is a rope.
A little piece of rope.
This has a very, very-- what I
would call a good-sweet flavor,
as distinct from icky-sweet.
It's like the sweetness of fresh
strawberries or fine honey,
as compared with the
sweetness of cheap candy.
It's frustrating that I can't
convey these smells to you
in words.
Same sort of
frustration one gets
in trying to describe
color to the blind.
Although sometimes you
can get very close to it.
I have a friend, a girl
who was born blind.
Maybe I mentioned her on
one of these programs.
But she has no idea
what darkness is.
And so I had to try to give her
an idea of what the stars are.
Why we love the stars.
So I said, look,
imagine-- when you
touch the edge of something,
you feel the edge.
And then you move your hand
away and nothing obstructs
your hand.
So there is space.
Nothing obstructing.
Now imagine if you could put
your hands out and feel around
yourself a large collection of
randomly distributed prickles.
Sharp points.
Only they don't hurt you.
They don't hurt you like
the point of a needle.
They're a kind of pleasure pain.
I mean, if I were to give you
a friendly smack on the behind,
you wouldn't interpret
it as being an assault.
You would say it was a friendly
smack, and therefore it was OK.
So in the same way we
get this impression
with the things we call our eyes
of a friendly prickle coming
at us from all over space
when we can see them at night.
So we try and translate
the language of sight
into the language of touch.
And so, likewise, we
have this difficulty
in talking about smell to people
who, as GK Chesterton said,
"they haven't got no
noses, and goodness only
knowses the
noselessness of man,"
Well, now, there are other
interesting things here,
of different
varieties of incense.
I want to introduce you
to this particular thing.
Have to be careful when handling
incense, as it gets hot.
And I shall have to
use my fire magic.
You know people walk on fire?
And you do this by
making friends with fire.
You mustn't be too
frightened of it.
Here's a wonderful gadget.
It's spiral incense,
which comes from Pakistan.
This, again, is a punk, used
for keeping away mosquitoes.
You can light that
and burn it for hours,
keep your insects away.
And then there's
another interesting form
of spiral incense,
which is this, where
a symbol is laid out in incense.
Sometimes a-- you know, a
religious symbol or whatever.
And you light it
at the beginning.
And it crawls all the way
along until the symbol
is outlined in black.
Now, in the West, the principal
incense in use is a resin.
Frankincense is really
basic to incenses
used in the Christian
churches, both of the East
and of the West.
And the delightful thing
about using frankincense
is the censer, or thurible,
with which you swing it.
And I mean swing it.
It's just as charming to
use-- as you remember,
in the last program,
we got fascinated
with swinging an orange.
And in the same way you
can swing this thing.
And even swing it right
around without it coming out.
But this is the way
it's used throughout
the Western churches.
And which, for reasons unknown
to me, the Protestants gave up.
And they lost all the
joy of doing this thing
to the greater glory of God.